docs: add best practices and a "manage charms" how-to (#1615)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/manage-charm-design.md

> (how-to-manage-charm-design)=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(manage-charm-design)=
```

This is the convention I've followed everywhere else (now "how-to" in the anchors).

> # How to manage charm design

Reviewer: This title is very artificial. Also, I think it shouldn't exist and its two sections should be moved into the Manage charms doc. That was precisely the idea behind that doc -- to help tell this high level how-to story about how to lay out the pieces in your charm code and how to handle errors, etc. I think the manage logs doc can probably be incorporated as a section into the Manage charms doc too. So:

Manage charms
- Design/Architect a charm
- Handle logs in a charm (dunno if "handle" is the best word there)
- Handle errors in a charm
- Build functionality in a charm (this can be the title for the section that says "a charm should do one thing and do it well", and "a charm should take advantage of other charms")

> ## Module layout

Reviewer: I'd make this section title active. It's what we do in every other how-to. The idea is that you should be able to get the story of a doc just by reading the in-page TOC, and for a how-to that had better be things you want to achieve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(design-your-charm)=
## Design your charm
```

Or something active like this that fits the contents. Maybe "Architect your charm".

> In your `src` folder, use the `charm.py` file provided by `charmcraft init` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your `src/charm.py` 
```

define the charm class and manage the charm's interface with Juju: set up the
event observation and add the handlers. For each workload that the charm

> manages, add a `{workload}.py` file that contains methods for interacting with

Reviewer: Here and everywhere else:

```suggestion
manages, add a `<workload>.py` file that contains methods for interacting with
```

This has been the convention I've followed for placeholder thingies everywhere else.

the workload.

```{note}

> If there is an existing Python library for managing your workload, then use that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is an existing Python library for managing your workload, use that
```

rather than creating a `{workload}.py` file yourself.
```

In your `src/charm.py` file, you will have a single class inheriting from
[](ops.CharmBase). Arrange the content of that charm in the following order:

1. An `__init__` that instantiates any needed library objects and then observes
   all relevant events.
2. Event handlers, in the order that they are observed in the `__init__` method.
   Note that these handlers should all be private to the class
   (`def _on_install(...):` not `def on_install(...):`)
3. Public methods.
3. Other private methods.

```{tip}
Use private methods or module-level functions rather than nested functions.
```

> ## Error handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(handle-errors)=
## Handle errors
```

> Throughout your charm code, handle potential errors in preference to letting the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughout your charm code, try to anticipate and handle errors rather than letting the
```

> charm crash and have the charm go to an error state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
charm crash and go into an error state.
```

> * Automatically recoverable error: the charm should go into `maintenance` status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Automatically recoverable error:** the charm should go into `maintenance` status
```

  until the error is resolved and then back to `active` status. Examples of
  automatically recoverable errors are those where the operation that resulted
  in the error can be retried. Retry a small number of times, with short
  delays between attempts, rather than having the charm error out and relying on
  Juju or the Juju admin for the retry. If the error is not resolved after
  retrying, then use one of the following techniques.
* Operator recoverable error: the charm should go into the `blocked` state until
  the operator resolves the error. An example is that a configuration option is
  invalid.

> * Unexpected/unrecoverable error: the charm should enter the error state. Do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Unexpected/unrecoverable error:** the charm should enter the error state. Do
```

  this by raising an appropriate exception in the charm code. Note that the unit

>   status will only show an `error` status, and the Juju admin will need to use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  status will only show an `error` status, and the charm user will need to use
```

I'd always try to avoid saying "Juju admin" -- that has a specific meaning in Juju. I'd stick to "charm author" and "charm user" -- where the latter is implicitly a Juju user, whether admin or other.

>   the Juju log to get details of the problem. Ensure that the logging and

Reviewer: FYI There's a PR in Juju to update the Manage logs and Manage charms docs with content that used to be in the charm SDK (that I somehow forgot to take care of in the big move). No consequences for this doc -- the Ops Manage logs doc already links to some of that content. https://ops.readthedocs.io/en/latest/howto/manage-logs.html

>   exception raised makes it clear what is happening, and - when possible - how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  exception raised makes it clear what is happening, and -- when possible -- how
```

Seems be a matter of taste, and I leave it up to you, but to me this should be an em dash. (And it's how I've been doing things myself.)

  the Juju admin can solve it. The admin may need to file a bug and potentially
  downgrade to a previous version of the charm.

```{tip}
By default, Juju will retry hooks that fail, but Juju admins can disable this
behaviour, so charms should not rely on it.
```

> ## Adopt the charming ecosystem

Reviewer: If this is incorporated into the Manage charms doc, it might be more 

```suggestion
(make-your-charm-take-advantage-of-the-charm-ecosystem)=
## Make your charm take advantage of the charm ecosystem
```

> Consider how you could enhance your charm by supporting relations with an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider how you could enhance your charm by supporting relations with the
```

Author: I was trying to keep this generic: saying that you should have something for observability, maybe something for identity, maybe something for ingress, and so on -- but not saying "use COS", "use Canonical's Identity charms", and so forth. If we keep that approach, then I think "an observability stack" is the right way to go. 

I like the broader "we have a whole ecosystem of charms, go find a good one for these things you probably want" leaving CharmHub to be the place that says "everyone loves and uses X for Y".

However, I do also see the reasoning behind a Canonical doc promoting Canonical charms, with the confidence that they *are* the best and most popular, and being more specific, particularly since CharmHub doesn't have much in the way of "top charms" currently.

Are you strongly in favour of the specific recommendations approach?

Reviewer: Nah, either works fine for me. Maybe the text can be generic and the specific recommendations can go into a tips box. What tripped me up, I think, was the phrasing which so closely mimicked the names of the products that it felt like a misspelling of said products rather than an attempt at speaking in principle. So, if you choose the generic main text (+ tip box with specific links) route, I'd suggest making the generic phrasing even more generic, e.g., "supporting relations with charms providing or supporting observability, identity, ingress, or scaling".

> observability stack, identity-platform, and ingress or scaling. Charms providing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Canonical Observability Stack](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack), [Canonical Identity Platform](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-identity-platform), and charms designed to help with ingress or scaling. Charms providing
```

that the charm manages, add a `{workload}.py` file that contains methods for
interacting with the workload.

```{note}
If there is an existing Python library for managing your workload, use that
rather than creating a `<workload>.py` file yourself.
```

In your `src/charm.py` file, you will have a single class inheriting from
[](ops.CharmBase). Arrange the content of that charm in the following order:

1. An `__init__` that instantiates any needed library objects and then observes
   all relevant events.
2. Event handlers, in the order that they are observed in the `__init__` method.
   Note that these handlers should all be private to the class
   (`def _on_install(...):` not `def on_install(...):`)
3. Public methods.
3. Other private methods.

```{tip}
Use private methods or module-level functions rather than nested functions.
```

(handle-errors)=
## Handle errors

Throughout your charm code, try to anticipate and handle errors rather than
letting the charm crash and go into an error state.

* **Automatically recoverable error**: the charm should go into `maintenance`
  status until the error is resolved and then back to `active` status. Examples

>   of automatically recoverable errors are those where the operation that

Author: Yeah, most of this content is moving from that doc, which is going away. If someone has a nicer short name, happy to do that here or in a follow-up PR.
